# Thesis

For my senior thesis, I extended my past work, where I had found that fake news contained more emotion than real news, to additionally investigate the ties between emotions and reactions to fake/real news, and the tie between social media algorithms and fake news virality. 

Abstract: Fake news can have extremely harmful effects on society, such as increasing polarization, instilling distrust in the media and government, inciting violence, and encouraging dangerous health practices. Psychologists believe that fake news is effective because it incites an emotional response that clouds people’s judgment. To dive deeper into this theory, this study explores three related questions: Does fake news utilize more emotional language than real news? Do social media reactions to fake news contain more emotional language than reactions to real news? And lastly, do social media algorithms amplify the spread of fake news? Results demonstrate that fake news articles as a whole utilize more emotional language than real news, and particularly more negative emotion, while headlines of fake versus real news articles contain comparable amounts of emotional language, with fake news headlines skewing towards negative emotions and real news headlines skewing towards positive emotions. Analyzing tweeted reactions to fake versus real news challenged psychologists’ beliefs that fake news incites more emotional reactions, as tweets reacting to real news were found to contain more emotion than tweets reacting to fake news. Finally, this paper offers a novel approach to analyzing the connection between social media algorithms and fake news virality: comparing top Reddit posts in r/politics before and after Reddit implemented its suggested-content algorithm revealed that its implementation correlated with an approximately 30% increase in fake news virality. Overall, my results provide more insight into the complex relationship between fake news, social media algorithms, and emotions.
